1. Funny -- right clicked new file -- txt file and saved as readme or Learnings.txt -- so basically got saved as txt.txt

2. To check your operating system, use the method specific to your device:
Windows: Press Windows Key + R, type winver, and press Enter.  
This displays your Windows edition and version. 
Alternatively, go to Start > Settings > System > About for detailed device and OS specifications.

--> OS - Windows 11 currently for this project

3. IMPORTANT WARNING  Python Version Issue
Python 3.14 was just released and is bleeding edge. 
Key libraries for your project — especially GeoPandas, XGBoost, and SHAP — do not yet have stable builds for 3.14. 
You will hit installation errors later that are very hard to debug as a beginner.
The safe version for this project is Python 3.11. It has full support for every single library in your stack.

4. After I downloaded the python version required -- The next steps given by claude --
Open VS Code → press Ctrl + ` (that's the backtick key, just below Escape)
This opens the built-in terminal. Type this and press Enter:
py -3.11 --version
--> Output -- Python 3.11.9

5. Created Virtual env in the project folder
Creation code in terminal--> py -3.11 -m venv venv311
Activation -->venv311\Scripts\activate

What is a Virtual Environment?
Qa: What is a virtual environment in Python?
"A virtual environment is an isolated Python installation for a specific project. It has its own Python version and its own set of libraries — completely separate from the system Python. Think of it like a clean room dedicated to one project, so nothing from outside can interfere with it."


Qb: Why do we use virtual environments?
"Because different projects need different library versions. For example, one project needs XGBoost 1.5 and another needs XGBoost 2.0 — if both share the same Python, they'll conflict and break. A virtual environment keeps each project's dependencies isolated and reproducible. It also ensures that when someone else runs your code, they get the exact same environment you used."


Qc: What does 'activating' a virtual environment mean?
"Activating tells your terminal — use the Python and libraries inside this folder, not the system-wide Python. The (venv311) prefix you see in the terminal is the confirmation that you're working inside the isolated environment."

Qd: What is the Scripts folder inside a virtual environment?

"When Python creates a virtual environment, it generates a Scripts folder inside it. This folder contains the actual executables — like python.exe, pip.exe, and the activate file we just ran. When you run venv311\Scripts\activate, you're telling Windows — use the python.exe sitting in this Scripts folder, not the global one. It's essentially the engine room of the virtual environment."

6.  In terminal I added --> mkdir data\raw data\processed notebooks src outputs models reports
Showed Error as I was using cmd but giving powershell command
PowerShell needs commas between folder names, not spaces.
so correct --> mkdir data\raw, data\processed, notebooks, src, outputs, models, reports

Issue 1 — mkdir failed in PowerShell

Command from CMD doesn't work in PowerShell
CMD uses spaces: mkdir a b c
PowerShell uses commas: mkdir a, b, c
Lesson: Always check which terminal you're in before running commands

7. >> tree -->showed the exact project tree

8. To add new files -->code requirements.txt and code README.md in terminal --> also after copy pasting the code i did (ctrl+S) Only then the files showed on my folder list

9. Then git init and further commands --BUT 
Issue 2 — venv311 got tracked by Git
We created venv311 before creating .gitignore
Git started tracking thousands of library files inside it
Lesson: Always create .gitignore BEFORE running git add .
Correct order: .gitignore first → then git add → then git commit

Issue 3 — How we fixed it
git rm -r --cached venv311 — removes venv from Git tracking
Does NOT delete the actual folder from your computer
Just tells Git "stop watching this"
Lesson: --cached flag = remove from Git only, not from disk

Golden Rule learned today:
Never push venv to GitHub. It has thousands of files, is machine-specific, and unnecessary. Anyone cloning your repo just runs pip install -r requirements.txt to recreate it.


10. One thing to do right now so this never happens again:
Every time we start a new terminal session, before doing anything, run these two checks:
Check 1 — Are you in the right folder?
powershell-->pwd   (print working directory)
Should show: D:\Resume Project DS 1
Check 2 — Is venv active?
Look for (venv311) in your prompt. If missing, run:
powershellvenv311\Scripts\activate
Make these two a habit. Every single session. Non-negotiable.

11. That blue line on the left side of lines 47-69 is VS Code's modified line indicator.
It means those lines are newly added since your last Git commit. Nothing is wrong — it's just VS Code visually showing you "these lines changed since last save/commit."
Three colours you'll see there:
🔵 Blue = line modified
🟢 Green = new line added
🔴 Red arrow = line deleted
Very useful habit — glance at it to know what you've changed before committing.

12. Project Folder Structure — What Goes Where

data/raw/
Original downloaded datasets. Never edit anything here.
NFHS-5 district factsheets (CSV)
Census 2011 demographics (CSV)
India district shapefile

data/processed/
Cleaned versions of the raw data after you've fixed missing values, merged datasets etc.
master_clean.csv — your final cleaned dataset (Day 13)

notebooks/
All your Jupyter notebooks. One per phase.
01_data_cleaning.ipynb
02_eda.ipynb
03_modeling.ipynb etc.

src/
Python scripts — reusable code extracted from notebooks.
train_model.py
predict.py
preprocess.py

outputs/
All charts, maps, plots your code generates.
Correlation heatmaps
Folium interactive map
SHAP plots

models/
Saved ML models after training.
xgboost_model.pkl
scaler.pkl

reports/
Final documentation.
Policy recommendations
Data dictionary
Project summary
