1. pd.read_csv() loads tabular data
gpd.read_file() loads shapefiles
df.info() reveals dtype problems hiding in plain sight
Target columns being object instead of float64 is a real-world data quality issue
676 vs 706 district mismatch between datasets is a merge challenge you will solve in Day 12

2. Right now the data is sitting in a folder - D6 we will load the data in jupyter notebook and run through python and use pandas() and geopandas library().

3. What is the shape? How many rows and columns exist
What are the columns? What variables are available to you
What are the data types? Is Python reading numbers as numbers, or as text accidentally

Think of it as reading the label on a medicine bottle before prescribing it to a patient.

What Tool We Use & Why
Jupyter Notebook — because it lets you write code AND write notes in the same place. Every cell shows output immediately. This is the industry standard for data exploration.

4. Ran --> jupyter notebook (in terminal to launch) - Already installed in my venv311 Environment and created day6_data_loading.ipynb file - chose kernel as - python venv311

5. Cell 1 - imported both libraries 
import pandas as pd — loads the Pandas library and gives it a short nickname pd. Pandas is your main tool for reading and working with CSV files.
import geopandas as gpd — loads GeoPandas, nicknamed gpd. This is the special library that can read map/shapefile data.

6. Cell 2 - .read_csv function used and saved to dataframe and .shape function used
What we are doing
We are telling Pandas to read your CSV file and store it in a variable called df. The name df stands for "dataframe" — that is what Pandas calls a table of data.
What each line does:

pd.read_csv(...) — tells Pandas to open and read a CSV file
"../data/raw/nfhs5_district_kaggle.csv" — the path to your file. The .. means "go one folder up" (from notebooks/ back to project root, then into data/raw/)
df.shape — tells you how many rows and columns exist as (rows, columns)
print(...) — displays the result on screen

7. # See the first 5 rows of the dataset
df.head() -->df.head() shows you the first 5 rows of your dataset — like a quick peek at what the data actually looks like as a table.

8. # See all column names
df.columns.tolist()-->df.columns gives you all column names. .tolist() converts them into a simple readable list.
We need to see this because we have to find our 3 target variables — the stunting %, wasting %, and underweight % columns. Their names in this dataset may be long sentences like the ones you saw in the table header.

9. df.info() tells you for every column:

Its name
How many non-null (non-missing) values exist
What data type Python assigned it — number, text, decimal etc.

This is critical because sometimes numbers get read as text accidentally — and that breaks all future calculations.

706 entries — 706 districts confirmed
109 columns — all loaded
float64(54) — 54 columns are decimal numbers (good, most health % columns)
int64(4) — 4 columns are whole numbers
object(51) — 51 columns are being read as text ⚠️

That object(51) needs attention later. Some percentage columns may have been read as text instead of numbers — possibly because they contain special characters like * or - in the raw data. We will fix this in Day 7-8 during cleaning.

10. # Check missing values in every column
df.isnull().sum()
isnull() checks every cell — is it empty or not. .sum() counts how many empty cells exist per column.
This gives us our first look at data quality. In health datasets, missing values are very common — some districts may not have reported certain indicators.

11. # Quick statistical summary of numerical columns
df.describe()
df.describe() gives you for every numerical column:

count, mean, min, max
25%, 50%, 75% percentiles

We mainly want to check our 3 target columns — are the stunting/wasting/underweight percentages in a realistic range? For India we expect stunting around 30-40%.

12. BUT ALL WERE OBJECT type

13. # Load the India district shapefile
gdf = gpd.read_file("../data/raw/india_shapefile/gadm41_IND_2.shp")

print("Shape:", gdf.shape)
print("Columns:", gdf.columns.tolist()) 

14. gdf.head() 

THAT'S ALL FOR TODAY

*A Jupyter kernel is the computational engine that executes code in a notebook. It maintains the state of all variables and imports for the duration of a session. When a kernel restarts, all in-memory state is lost and cells must be re-executed. In production workflows this is why we separate data loading, preprocessing, and modeling into modular scripts rather than relying on notebook state.*

One simple rule: If you ever see a NameError: X is not defined — your kernel restarted. Always re-run all cells from the top.